Now,
beside Francis Shepherd, what other
oceanographers would you cite as having some
major impact on your career?
Well, I think in the 50s, there were...
Well, when I first began oceanography, the
dominant person in the field was Harold Spurge, a
physical oceanographer, so he didn't really
affect me too much directly, but he was sort of the
dean of oceanography. And in the 50s, there
developed a triumvirate oceanographers in the
US, and these were Roger Vell and Columbus Islin
and Morris Ewing, the directors of three major
laboratories. And
personally, Roger Vell had much influence upon my
career because we were very personally involved
in many things, though we never did publish
together. We were involved in expeditions.
Columbus Houston had almost no direct influence
upon me, but Morris Ewing had a great influence by
his work at the Lamont Observatory. And he, to my
way of thinking, was the preeminent sort of marine
geologist of my generation. It's too bad he's not
around for you to interview, but he had enormous
impact upon marine geology and geophysics.
So, as a person who was not a colleague of mine, not a
direct colleague, he certainly had great
influence upon my thinking and work.
other people who had considerable influence upon
my work, in geology, for example, Harry Hess, I
knew very well, and he was, his ideas were very
close to mine. We more or less thought along the
same lines. And at Lamont, Bruce Hazen was always,
his interests were very close to mine. His
influence was very important. Now at Scripps, I
guess Bill Menard and I worked together. H.W.
Menard. He and I, of course, published together. I
first bought him into oceanography and employed
him at the Navy Electronics Laboratory. My other
colleagues there in the Navy, notably Robert
Dill, he's now director of the West Indies
Laboratory, and David Moore, who's now chief
scientist of the Deep Sea Drilling Project, and
Edwin Hamilton I guess were very important
colleagues and influences
I guess these were the perhaps the the major people
earlier on of course Henry Stetson's work was
important but his most of his ideas were rather
classical and where he was involved in ideas about
the continental shelf of the slope that I was
interested in disproving, rather than...
But...
Well, the whole... Well, I think preeminent
perhaps marine geologist, a person who I knew very
well, had much contact with, and perhaps the
preeminent marine geologist worldwide, was
Kynan, Philip Kynan, in the Netherlands. And his
whole grasp of the subject was outstanding, and he
had an important influence upon my thinking and
work. He particularly
Of course, he developed a concept of turbidity
currents and did a great job with this. I more or
less tried to follow his model in my work on impact
structures and astroplanes because I originally
thought that if I published one paper I'd done my
job and I should forget about it and go on to
something else. He published great groups of
paper, often repeating himself on turbidity
currents, and he became a sort of a great
protagonist of the idea. Well, I more or less did
the same thing in terms of astroblemes, that as
long as I was being cast in the role of being the
protagonist, I might as well live up to that role
and try to promote these things, even to the point
of being a very aggressive advocate of ideas,
ideas I wasn't too sure of. But nevertheless,
you're cast in this role, and you have to react by
trying to defend or promote that point of view. And
so in this regard, I more or less tried to follow the
model of Philip Koonin and his great protagonism
in favor of turbidity currents. So I would say that
his works and his philosophy of life was kind of
important. what I attempted to do. Of course, I
should mention K.O. Emery, too, since he and I were
classmates and roommates for many years, and we
collaborated in the early years, and his
influence was very important.
Several people have suggested that possibly one
of the problems that oceanography faced in the
period between about 46 to about 53 or 54, and
perhaps a little later, was that
I may use it collectively, Scripps, Woods Hole,
and Lamont,
perhaps had too much of a role in directing
oceanographic research. That is, that they
perhaps had research funds too tightly held. Was
this your experience? Would you agree with that?
Well, I agree that they had
funds very tightly held, because they were...
They were both the receiver and the giver. I mean,
their oceanographers would go to Washington and
occupy the seats of the people giving grants
within ONR, like Roger Revelle, and people of that
category. I'm not sure this was bad. This may have
been a good thing. I really can't assess that
because oceanography did need some focal points
and it needed large amounts of money to support
ships and oceanographers are a group of
scientists of various disciplines and
backgrounds whose common bond is needing a ship
and if you look at The failure in the earlier years
of French oceanography, it is based upon the fact
that the French people and scientists are, as they
are reported to be, rather prima donnas. And they
couldn't get together. And there was never, every
French scientist of himself was not big enough to
justify having a ship. But he couldn't
collaborate with his other people, you know, in
associated fields, to get a nucleus large enough
to support a ship. But by having Woods Hole and
Lamont and Scripps in this major role as being the
focal points, this really got oceanography off
the ground. And so I would suggest, in spite of the
fact there's a certain amount of inbreeding
between people going back and forth to
Washington, it probably was a good thing.
I think it's fair to say that, for example, Ewing
and Ravel had different personalities. From what
I can read from Bullard and then my interviews with
Ravel, I would suggest there are different kinds
of people.
Would you hazard to evaluate their contribution,
let's say? Or that is, these people who were
important in oceanography, what sort of talent
did they bring to oceanography?
Well, in the...
I guess sometime in the late 50s, Time magazine put
together a cover story on oceanography, and there
was sort of a competition about who should be the
cover picture should be on, whether it should be
Islin, Revell, or Ewing. It turned out to be
Columbus Islin. This, in my view, was probably the
least appropriate It should have been Morris
Ewing. And if not Morris Ewing, it should have been
Roger Revelle. Or if not, then thirdly, Columbus
Islin as being sort of the Mr. Oceanography of the
field. And why Islin really got this billet, I
don't know. I don't know what was behind it
eventually. But
Revelle and Ewing were distinctly different
sorts of people. Roger Val is very charismatic,
and he's a great, big, lovable character with many
foibles, but also a great and very productive
mind.
It always seemed to many of us he was highly
disorganized, and it always seemed that he was
always... He was always more interested in what he
didn't know than what he did. I mean, he was always
writing papers and working on the edge of his
knowledge rather than in those fields where he had
a very firm basis. And so he developed a very sort of
broad-spectrum view of oceanography.
And while I would say Morris Ewing was a very
intense... sort of a scientist-scientist,
interested in the data himself, interested in,
and he held a very tight control over Lamont and
over the use of the ship use, and did a fantastic job
of data collecting, and
he's now credited, for example, in his book about
Ewing, which is a rather misdirected book because
it doesn't really hit upon his important
contributions, which I would never really
deprecate, but it gives him too much credit for
plate tectonics, which he in fact didn't believe.
He tried to, well, perhaps he did more to prove it by
trying to disprove it because he began to make it,
he did have the idea and he didn't accept it and he
began to to collect data, and each time pointing
out why this didn't work. But in the end, of course,
his colleagues and themselves, they did a sudden
conversion in 67. They suddenly all threw in the
towel and became drifters. So it was a very
interesting development. And I think Morris
Ewing is preeminent as a contribution, as a
contributor to the science. I think his name is on
too many papers. I think he was a
lesser contributor. I mean, sometimes he never
could have written all these papers by himself.
And he was, it was difficult for him to
to give his colleagues sufficient freedom and
head, I think, to have them do things on their own.
So he's earned too much control of the data. But,
well, maybe not, because the productivity of
Lamont and the heroic years of Lamont were doing
his regime. And Lamont will never be able to do what
it was under Ewing, but he ran a very tight ship
there. And the people working in that soda
environment always, anyone likes to be their own,
do their own thing, but he ran a very wonderful
operation, a very tight operation, and certainly
came out with some marvelous results. Well, in
contrast, Ravel was
extremely successful, of course, in developing
scripts. He
eventually, of course, left and went to Harvard. I
don't know the whole story behind that. I think it
was a mistake for him to do so
when he was not appointed chancellor of the campus
there, but
because I don't see how a man can contribute. I
don't know if he ever became a very good
demographer. Maybe he did, but certainly it's
very difficult for a person to suddenly become an
expert in a new field. I'm sure if anyone could do
it, Ravel could, but anyway, I was sorry to see him
leave the field of oceanography. There was some
objection to Revell taking over Scripps after the
war, particularly from, if I understand
correctly, Coral Hubbs and Francis Shepard.
Would you have any idea perhaps why? Was there
something about it? Well, there was a great sort of
personality clash around Scripps, and I think
there isn't always any sort of center like that,
and I think it's to be expected.
Ravel and Shepard operated in different manners.
They were wholly different personalities, and
both Shepard and
Hubbs were sort of non-mathematically oriented,
and so they really didn't speak much the same
language. Ravel was more versed across the board,
but he was, uh, and...
Ravel ran, he ran sort of slipshod over people, and
there's bound to be lots of sparks around. But I
think both, both Hubbs and, uh,
and Shepard had sort of a working relationship.
They, they, they were, they were not quiet about
it. They were not uncritical. And there's lots of,
uh,
shots being fired back and forth but i think it was
done in sort of a good scientific spirit and or they
they didn't tend to bury their differences they
there were strong differences i think the the sort
of a liaison a certain relationship did survive
there and they were both i mean both both shepherd
and hubs have been remarkably productive people
uh
Ravel was very difficult to work with. He wanted
also to be involved in too many things and too many
papers, which he couldn't really handle. And so if
something got in his hands, it might sit there on
the bottom of his pile for a year or two. And Shepard
was extremely impatient about getting things out
and published. And Ravel just had too many irons in
the fire. And it was too...
So it was just a different manner of working that
made this a very difficult arrangement.
And I think everyone who got directly involved,
including myself, had this sort of objection to
his method of operating, but at the same time he
found him a very delightful person and we really
admired his brilliance and his ability to get
things done and to inspire people to do things. I
wondered if possibly at that time in
oceanography, during those years, is that people
such as perhaps Ewing and certainly Revell,
people who were primarily movers, were needed to
stir up interest or to create interest in this
newly developing field. Would you agree with
that?
Yeah, I would agree with a part of it. I think heroes
are made by the conditions. I mean, if you have a
war, you're going to have some heroes. You're
going to have great generals. And so
heroes are sort of product of the situation and the
environment. A hero would always step forward.
I think we're very fortunate in oceanography in
having people as, you know, basically as
outstanding as Revelle and Ewing in these roles.
See, there
was a time when the whole field of geophysics was
controlled by two or three Scandinavians. Then
oceanography became under SpareDrip, and then
there was this triumvirate for a decade. Now, of
course, oceanography is much too large to
identify any people with this amount of influence
or power or control. It's all for the better. I
mean, we no longer have any heroes unless it's some
sort of very small sub-discipline. This is a
matter of the size of the field and the way it's
evolved and the fact that we perhaps
look at things a little more sophisticated and
more critical so we tend to get away from the star
system which is good. I mean the star system is
probably the bane of existence in certain fields
of hearts and so forth where you have to be a to make
it you have to have you have to be a star you have to
have a name that people recognize and people know
and people only know and recognize so many names so
in order to become a in order to become a Cousteau
you have to knock off Cousteau you see many many
people have tried this they've tried Hans Hans
Haas, other people who have tried to become
Cousteaus, but they've never really succeeded in
that role, because it is such a tight star system.
But we, in science, we've gotten away from that,
which is good. Now, I realize this is very
difficult to do, but in terms of your
accomplishments, what would you consider your
major accomplishment in oceanography?
In oceanography? Well, I...
I guess my main contributions would be a sort of a
series of contributions to what we now call plate
tectonics. And with playing an initial role, I
think it's somewhat,
which was mostly done by Harry Hess, but in
addition by myself on what is now called seafloor
spreading, and some of the basic ideas of
continental drift and the dispersion of
continents from Pangea. I think secondarily
probably the
most important thing I've done is probably
playing an important role in deep submergence
with getting the
Navy and the country involved in deep
submersibles deep research submersibles deep
research submersibles program by the way which is
really not hasn't blossomed of late it went to a
certain point and it kind of has been in doldrums
since but it's uh I guess it's again kind of
reprogramming along different lines
but uh I haven't uh My papers generally have been
very, very short and brief and papers involving
synthesis of ideas and rather than I
guess trying to be somewhat interpretive of being
ahead of my time trying to work in some frontier and
see something a bit differently from other
people. Why, by the way, are submersibles in the
doler rooms now? Well, the...
We had hoped, for example, that NOAA would have a
substantial mission in submersibles through the
must office, and this has not really
materialized. Most of the money in these deep
submergence, it takes really public money to
develop these things. If we had deep
submersibles, say, one-tenth of one percent,
which goes into airplane development, we would be
extremely happy.
Many, many, a whole series of submersibles came
off the line for, in the 60s, like the Luminat and
various aerospace companies were all building
their own. And none of these have really proved
supportable by private industry. They involved
either direct government subvention or spin-off
money from aerospace industry based upon their
government contracts. And so, these have
proved to be very expensive. And for many years,
the Mercy Submersibles were getting a great deal
of the publicity of oceanography. maybe more than
half, but we're only doing maybe 10% of the work. So
the Navy funding, although I spoke of this level of
being several tens of millions of dollars, really
hasn't gone into
programs that I personally would like. It's like
the Navy oceanography program. They have a very
large oceanography program, but they appear to
redefine what is oceanography and not much of what
I would call oceanography comes out of it now I
don't know where all the money goes to in deep
submersibles but it's really it's evident now
that a good bit of it went into the raising Russian
submarine
but Navy unfortunately has this When they get a
program like this, they
write regulations that make things very
difficult to operate. They have safety
operations and so forth. And they get to the point
where they really can't have the flexibility to
really develop a frontier. And so then they go into
a training mode whereby they train officers to
operate submersibles. and set up a school, and by
the time an officer is trained, he's transferred
elsewhere, so he doesn't really stay with the
program. In other words, they don't have any, the
Navy, among Navy officers, you have, they're
trained as line officers to be, and not a
specialist, and so they don't really stay with the
program and become involved in it. Most of the
useful part, or the best part, I suppose, of the the
Navy Submersible Program is the fact that people
retire from the Navy, they spin off people, and
these ex-submariners end up as directing Woods
Hole Alvin and other programs like that. In other
words, they spin off into the civilian side, and
then they specialize and become specialists in
deep submergence, rather than within the Navy,
because their officers tend to get transferred to
new posts, new positions, which keep them as
generalists rather than specialists.
The Navy set a role on development in
deep-suburban. This has been rather
disappointing.
Most of it's so classified, we don't even know what
they're doing.